studio/README.md, before:

# Opening Android Studio in the IDE

* Open the project in `//tools/adt/idea`
* Set a [*Path Variable*](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/settings-path-variables.html) named `SDK_PLATFORM` for the platform to use:
  * Linux: `linux/android-studio`
  * Mac: `darwin/android-studio/Contents`
  * Windows: `windows/android-studio`

*** note
Please note that in order for this Path Variable to take full effect, you need to close and reopen the project
***
If you are using IntelliJ 2020.2 or earlier, create a template JUnit configuration as described in
  [*Running tests using IntelliJ*](http://goto.corp.google.com/adtsetup#heading=h.31alixxsfo00)

# Updating the platform prebuilts

## From `go/ab`

The official way of updating prebuilts that can be commited to
`prebuilts/studio/intellij-sdk` is to get them from the `IntelliJ` target from
[ab/studio-main](http://ab/studio-main).  First identify the numeric build_id
`<bid>` (as of September 2021, a seven-digit number beginning with 7) you want
to update to; you can also use the presubmit build identifier `P` followed by an
8-digit number, findable from presubmit build display or from
[go/studio-presubmits](http://go/studio-presubmits).  Then you can run the
following command:

```
./tools/adt/idea/studio/update_sdk.py --download <bid>
```

which will update `tools/adt/idea` and `prebuilts/studio/intellij-sdk` with the new prebuilts. Note that if the jars are the same and there are no major version changes, `tools/adt/idea` won't need to be updated. At this point you are ready to upload the changes for review.

## From a locally built platform

In order to locally try changes to the platform, the prebuilts can be rebuilt as follows:

```
cd $SRC/tools/idea
./build_studio.sh
```

which will generate a set of artifacts in `tools/idea/out/studio/dist`. To update the prebuilts with these, run:

```
$SRC/tools/adt/idea/studio/update_sdk.py --path $SRC/tools/idea/out/studio/dist
```

Note: `build_studio.sh` does a clean build by default. You can use the
`--incremental` flag to do an incremental build instead, which is much faster
for repeated builds. There are also some additional build options you can set
via system properties; see `$SRC/tools/idea/platform/build-scripts/groovy/org/jetbrains/intellij/build/BuildOptions.groovy`
for details.

### Isolated builds

Note that in `go/ab` the prebuilts are built on a separate checkout to ensure that the `ant` build only has access to a few git repos.
If you want to have an isolated check out to build prebuilts you can checkout a separate repo like this:


```
repo init -u sso://googleplex-android.git.corp.google.com/platform/manifest -b studio-main -m studio-sdk.xml
repo sync -j10
```

And execute `update_sdk.py` from the main repo with the path pointing to this isolated checkout.

# Building Android Studio

To build Android Studio run
```
bazel build //tools/adt/idea/studio:android-studio
```
and it will produce the following files:

```
bazel-bin/tools/adt/idea/studio/android-studio.linux.zip
bazel-bin/tools/adt/idea/studio/android-studio.mac.zip
bazel-bin/tools/adt/idea/studio/android-studio.win.zip
```

# Running Android Studio

Unzipping the files produced in the last step, should be all that is needed. But there is a handy utility on linux to do this:

```
bazel run //tools/adt/idea/studio:android-studio
```

will unzip the linux binary in a directory in `/tmp`, and will run it from there. The even handier: 

```
bazel run //tools/adt/idea/studio:android-studio -- --debug
```

will set it up to wait for a remote debugger connection on the `:5005` port.

## Optimized builds

In order to build all dependencies with c++ optimized builds, stripped binaries, full zip compression, please use
```
bazel build //tools/adt/idea/studio:android-studio --config=release
```
Or our remote configuration which also implies release
```
bazel build //tools/adt/idea/studio:android-studio --config=remote
```

Commit message:

Update prebuilt readme with zipfile workaround
Bug: 234037608
Test: N/A
Change-Id: I906b3e9ea03a04404e6fb422ab91636718ca7425

GitOrigin-RevId: 9f0b12be65b4bc082fab1a374881345a2a7a3091

studio/README.md, after:

# Opening Android Studio in the IDE

* Open the project in `//tools/adt/idea`
* Set a [*Path Variable*](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/settings-path-variables.html) named `SDK_PLATFORM` for the platform to use:
  * Linux: `linux/android-studio`
  * Mac: `darwin/android-studio/Contents`
  * Windows: `windows/android-studio`

*** note
Please note that in order for this Path Variable to take full effect, you need to close and reopen the project
***
If you are using IntelliJ 2020.2 or earlier, create a template JUnit configuration as described in
  [*Running tests using IntelliJ*](http://goto.corp.google.com/adtsetup#heading=h.31alixxsfo00)

# Updating the platform prebuilts

## From `go/ab`

The official way of updating prebuilts that can be commited to
`prebuilts/studio/intellij-sdk` is to get them from the `IntelliJ` target from
[ab/studio-main](http://ab/studio-main).  First identify the numeric build_id
`<bid>` (as of September 2021, a seven-digit number beginning with 7) you want
to update to; you can also use the presubmit build identifier `P` followed by an
8-digit number, findable from presubmit build display or from
[go/studio-presubmits](http://go/studio-presubmits).  Then you can run the
following command:

```
./tools/adt/idea/studio/update_sdk.py --download <bid>
```

which will update `tools/adt/idea` and `prebuilts/studio/intellij-sdk` with the new prebuilts. Note that if the jars are the same and there are no major version changes, `tools/adt/idea` won't need to be updated. At this point you are ready to upload the changes for review.

## From a locally built platform

In order to locally try changes to the platform, the prebuilts can be rebuilt as follows:

```
cd $SRC/tools/idea
./build_studio.sh
```

which will generate a set of artifacts in `tools/idea/out/studio/dist`. To update the prebuilts with these, run:

```
$SRC/tools/adt/idea/studio/update_sdk.py --path $SRC/tools/idea/out/studio/dist
```

Note: `build_studio.sh` does a clean build by default. You can use the
`--incremental` flag to do an incremental build instead, which is much faster
for repeated builds. There are also some additional build options you can set
via system properties; see `$SRC/tools/idea/platform/build-scripts/groovy/org/jetbrains/intellij/build/BuildOptions.groovy`
for details.

### Isolated builds

Note that in `go/ab` the prebuilts are built on a separate checkout to ensure that the `ant` build only has access to a few git repos.
If you want to have an isolated check out to build prebuilts you can checkout a separate repo like this:


```
repo init -u sso://googleplex-android.git.corp.google.com/platform/manifest -b studio-main -m studio-sdk.xml
repo sync -j10
```

And execute `update_sdk.py` from the main repo with the path pointing to this isolated checkout.

## Prebuilt Zipfile Errors

Running `update_sdk.py` as described in either of the previous two sections currently results in a broken build as of November 2022. See
[b/234037608#comment7](https://b.corp.google.com/issues/234037608#comment7) for context and workarounds.

# Building Android Studio

To build Android Studio run
```
bazel build //tools/adt/idea/studio:android-studio
```
and it will produce the following files:

```
bazel-bin/tools/adt/idea/studio/android-studio.linux.zip
bazel-bin/tools/adt/idea/studio/android-studio.mac.zip
bazel-bin/tools/adt/idea/studio/android-studio.win.zip
```

# Running Android Studio

Unzipping the files produced in the last step, should be all that is needed. But there is a handy utility on linux to do this:

```
bazel run //tools/adt/idea/studio:android-studio
```

will unzip the linux binary in a directory in `/tmp`, and will run it from there. The even handier: 

```
bazel run //tools/adt/idea/studio:android-studio -- --debug
```

will set it up to wait for a remote debugger connection on the `:5005` port.

## Optimized builds

In order to build all dependencies with c++ optimized builds, stripped binaries, full zip compression, please use
```
bazel build //tools/adt/idea/studio:android-studio --config=release
```
Or our remote configuration which also implies release
```
bazel build //tools/adt/idea/studio:android-studio --config=remote
```
